Today for the Remembrance Bill.
Oh, thank you. You're the best. Are we lying?
Um, everybody joining online?
We're here today to
hear submissions on the Raco Remembrance Spell.
Um, so when you're ready, Akita,
your first submitter.
Leah Bell. Hmm. My mother's name?
Leah. Leah. It's beautiful. Not bell. Different to this one.
No, it is different to this one. Different to this list. No.
Yeah. And coming off. Yeah. Um,
Dan, Um, you've got members
of the Mafi Select Committee here today.
Uh, welcome. Uh, no, ma ha ma.
Um, really appreciate you coming online
to talk about your submission on, on that Remembrance Bill.
Um, you have up to 10 minutes,
but, um, feel free to, um, leave room for questions.
Um, you know, highlight key points.
Uh, take your submission as read. So over to you, Leah.
K. Thank you. Um, I'm Leah.
I am from Watmore Caves.
I was a petitioner, uh, as part of the
Mara campaign to commemorate the New Zealand Wars
as a public holiday at that time,
but a statutory day of Remembrance.
Um, as I outlined in my submission, um, the visit to
as a teenager for myself
and my peers, was deeply influential in our decision
to petition Parliament to have a statutory day
of remembrance, and also to introduce, uh,
education around the New Zealand wars into the curriculum.
So, firstly, I want to acknowledge that I completely toko,
uh, the mana and their decision making
and their thoughts
that they have put forward to the Civic Committee.
Um, and also want to raise
that I stand firmly in my positionality as Tanga and Pakeha.
So, what I would like to present
to the Select committee today is a few things.
Firstly, that I'm aware there is a rebalancing
of the curriculum taking place.
Um, I have great concerns about this
because I believe that this rebalancing, um, is a way
to take out the very important nature of the curriculum,
um, as it stands in which we understand history to
be at its center, Maori history.
Um, and I am concerned about the ways in which
there is an understanding
that learning about these histories is somewhat
burdensome on Al Tamari.
I would like to stipulate that in fact, it is
what is connecting for Tamari
and for Pakeha children, Toi children, to have a connection
to the ua, to have a connection to each other,
and to understand our purpose
and responsibilities here in, so
there's a few different mediums in which I think Rako, uh,
being returned to UA can be a place of maga can be a place
of education and, uh, public engagement with the guidance
of ua, of course.
Um, I think that
pow children in particular being engaged in these histories
is deeply valuable, um,
because you learn a lot of different sensibilities
that you would not get in mainstream education when you
engage with these histories.
Um, one of those, you know, being orry, um,
but also I think a deep sense
of empathy is greatly missing right now in our, in,
um, through Parliament, if I'm going to be honest.
And through, uh, a lot of the dialogues, dog whistling
and rhetoric that is being spread around at the moment.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and, you know, I'm of the belief that I wish
that our parliamentarians had a mandatory, um,
New Zealand history 1 0 1 paper that they had to take
before entering Parliament,
because I think it would inform policies.
Um, and I just, I think, again, have that sense of empathy
that, um, was generated when Mike could have visited, um,
visited Orko and galvanized us to take action.
Uh, I think, again, the heaviness that they talk
around these histories is, uh, is very prevalent
and something that was, there was great concern around us
as young people and our ability to, um,
take on this heaviness, um,
and speak, I guess, in a national context.
Um, but I would also like to, you know, like
to say that there are different mediums in which we can
engage with these histories in a safe way.
And a few examples of that, uh, you know, the Rania album
that was recently, um, recently released where a bunch
of artists from across released their, um, music,
um, writing about the events of Rania.
Uh, and I've always said that arts is the best way to engage
young people and engage, I guess, our country in a way,
in a, in a medium that is accessible
and invites curiosity rather than, um, debate,
which I think is the key thing to bring up here.
'cause I don't think it's ne it's necessary for this history
to be debated as such,
but rather engaged with, with curiosity.
Um, I also would like to, again, return back
to the importance of young, young people engaging
with these histories and the impact that it has.
Um, recently I was a project co-lead on a
called To May toy, which essentially means be brave,
be creative, and it was getting 50 young people from
around Waikato to engage through art mediums,
which a lot of them do not have access to, um,
and engage in, uh, discussions
and creative mediums around the topic of identity.
And, and we were really lucky to invite the director
of Kafa, Mato like Jonathan,
to speak to all these young people.
And we could see that the impact of, um, having a story
that is, I guess, our history, um, the impact
that having a story that is our history had on these young
people, and which that they could see themselves
as their own storytellers
and have agency over their own lives,
particularly in areas like,
and where I'm from, a lot of young people, um,
can be very pigeonhole into
their expectations for their life.
Um, and I guess not be encouraged to broaden their horizons,
be beyond their small town.
And often what that means is, um,
their own cultural values are devalued, I guess,
in mainstream society
and engaging with these histories, having rako be a place of
national and international significance, as I
outlined in my submission, is a way
of reinforcing the manner of, um,
our young people in particular and seeing,
and I guess emphasizing to them that
their stories, their place.
That all matters very, very deeply.
Um, you know, I also want to acknowledge, uh,
why this is deeply important to, you know, this process
of repatriation and ideally, um, a reconciliation
and apology process would be ideal as well.
Um, is because, uh, this event, or Arco,
or the New Zealand Wars is arguably the catalyst
and the beginning of a great chasm of
hurt in our nation.
And I want to acknowledge, um, the recent state abuse report
that came through, um,
and make the link there that, you know,
we have Wau in this area, wau of mine, whose ancestors
fled from Raco,
and then they in turn fled from
state care officials coming to take their babies
and head along the same river on the Pune River
that their ancestors once did.
And so this cycle is very, very linked.
Um, and there's a really interesting, um, thought
that was brought up by Vincent
and O'Malley in some of his works where he said
that Arra was talking to him,
and he said that the hardship from
KO is not the fact that he has to see the names of, um, the
ary and, uh, around, um, as street names,
but actually the fact that the Una
are living it hard in many cases
and have suffered, uh, continue to suffer under state care.
Um, so I want to bring, you know, I wanted to bring that up
because I think we, it's so easy for us to see
these events in isolation.
Um, but it's not at all in isolation.
It's very much linked to the everyday lives of Wana across,
and particularly in wa where I'm from.
So I think that, um,
I think, again, having a focus around Moana
and also having a, a deep focus around the value of wahine
and their stories is additionally really important.
Um, and I know that, um, mat Toro
and many other comar were want to continue to do that.
It was the stories of, uh, of Wahine in particular
that inspired us.
Um, because we often, you know, in a,
in a Western context, don't get to hear the stories of,
of women and children, um, in our, in a remembrance
of wars and conflicts.
Um, but I think, you know, the harm that was perpetuated at
that time, um,
and the abuse that Wahine in particular suffered at the
hands of the, um, constabulary, um, and,
and Imperial Soldiers is something
that needs additional recognition.
And, um, also the, the placing, the recognition of Wahine
and their agency as well, um, in this time as Warriors, um,
and the roles that they played is something that I think
also with this Bill has an opportunity
to be additionally recognized.
Um, I think, you know,
I have talked about a lot of different areas in which this
bill could be taken, but I think the main thing is that,
you know, there is, there is endless
hurt across our country.
And I think it's something that a lot
of haha are not willing, excuse me, to reckon with,
because it mean they think that it might mean we have
to change our own understanding of our, um,
of our own identity in many ways.
But I think that if we can create places like
to be a space of public engagement, discussion,
storytelling, it is something that is liberating
for all people across alt to speak truth to our history.
When we initially started petitioning, we would have a lot
of, um, elderly phar actually approach us on the street
and say, talk about the relief that they felt
that they could talk about their own ancestors' actions, um,
and talk about it in a way that everything was on the table.
Um, and I think that that's what we really need
to do right now, is just put everything on the table
and be really considered about our history,
because I think there is an,
A blind is on moment happening again, whether that be
with the repeal of seven aa, whether that be
with the Fast Track Bill, um, you know,
my generation are feeling very anxious
and very, very tired around the decisions
that are being made currently in the government.
Um, uh,
and I think this is a small action
that recognizes the humanity of all peoples in Altura,
but particularly, and those that fought there,
um, and passed there.
So I, um, I'm happy to answer any questions,
but I guess my question is, um,
how does the Select Committee
and how is Parliament wanting to, um, encourage,
I guess, uphold education within, um, within the space of,
and, uh, how are you willing to make sure that, uh,
Sansa stories are, um, honored within the
new curriculum here?
If there's something, is that something
that you have the capacity to answer at this time? Yes.
Thank you. Um, Leah, and I'm sorry we've run out of time,
but just want to make it to you for your work a decade ago
and your classmates at, or Hong College.
Um, you know,
I wish we had more young people like yourselves that
stood up for things they're passionate about.
So, uh, well done.
And, uh, shout out to everybody in the Mighty Omo, just next
to another, um, suburb.
Suburb near and dear, uh, the Mighty Tiki, uh,
where I'm from and, uh, or where my, where my two puna from.
But, um, look to your question, um, that is,
I think a question for the three iwi Yeah.
Around how they want to, um, uphold, um,
the educational, uh, facilities.
Um, we are here today to enable the legislation
that will give them the opportunity
to have those discussions in a meaningful, uh,
way focused on the future.
So, um, I, I guess that's the simplest answer.
Um, mm-Hmm. If you want to learn anything more, um,
have me answer as chair.
I'm happy if you email me or we can email you,
but I'm just, we unfortunately ran out of time today.
Okay. Kda, thank you very
Much for your time.
Nu
Okay.
Next we have, uh, fat Ru Tini,
and there's your, oh, no worries.
I thought he was gonna die from Thanks very much.
Thank you, UA ru
my apologies.
Um, no, ma uh, you've got mps from across Parliament here,
uh, to listen to your submission today.
Um, so you've got up
to 10 minutes if you wish to have a court at all.
Please leave time for that in your 10 minutes, but
otherwise, it's over to you.
Um, I made a submission in support of the
Remembrance bill, uh, and, uh, I, I'll just take it as read.
Um, that's before you.
Um, if, if there is one part, uh, uh, at the,
the submission speaks for itself as a descendant of a
who, uh, ma was part of the, uh,
tu contingent who traveled from Una in support of
s core in the battle of, uh, and, um,
and, you know, part of, uh, Kanu Mato the,
um, latest film by Mike Jonathan, uh,
is a huge part of that, uh, storyline that speaks of, um,
our great una of, uh,
was one of those who, uh, traveled with,
uh, and returned home.
He was one of the fortunate ones that returned home.
Uh, uh,
but on page two, I talk about the struggle
that my ness suffered from, uh, being a part of that event.
And that was the post, uh, it was the PSC that he suffered,
uh, and the impact that that had on his, um, whanau,
his wife having to step in
and take those leadership roles, uh,
within the whanau hapu in the community.
Uh, while he, uh, recovered from experiencing,
I'm guessing, was, um, you know, one
of the most traumatic experiences with someone like him
who comes from a small, quiet, uh,
community, nestled in the middle of the,
to then experience his kind of first encounters with, uh,
uh, military, uh, British combat
and the, um, uh, Maori
land wars that were happening at the time.
And for Una, um, our, my
oldest, uh, one of the older sisters.
She was about 95, uh, when she passed, uh,
about two years ago.
She talked about, uh, her uncles, uh,
having remembered their father, being in that kind of PST
and not understanding what that was.
Uh, and, um,
and years on, uh, as they, as nanny MuTu in that,
uh, grew old, uh, finally learned, um, uh, what
was, where it was, uh, the fact that they walked there,
that they experienced
what they experience on the battlefield,
and then to return home
and kind of feel, I suppose, defeated.
Uh, in my submission, uh, I write in support of, uh,
the, and the return of the ua, uh,
to the three iwi man.
Uh, and the fact that not only does this honor them as man,
uh, but I see this as a way of honoring my una
who traveled to
Mr.
Chair that, um, um, my presentation today is that
my w support this.
Uh, we see this as an opportunity
to now talk about our entrepreneurs, uh, participation,
my entrepreneur's involvement, uh, in the story
and narrative, and that we now, I see this, uh,
as now a, uh, a, his efforts will no longer be in vain,
uh, because I'm guessing in his, um, state
of post-traumatic, uh, that struggle
of his was understanding what, what it was he was going
through, I'm guessing, um, what hurt or what impact
or what mental to struggle he was kind of struggling
with at the time, uh, that he, uh, felt so,
uh, to the point where he was, he felt the same,
that he couldn't enact his leadership roles as a father,
as a husband, uh,
and as of, uh,
and community and that for his wife to then step in
and lead out, um, those, those leadership roles.
So, uh, I come here today to support,
uh, and support the gifting back.
Uh,
Um, so we've got time for questions members.
Uh, we've got one from Greg Fleming,
Oh, 10.
Uh, thank you so much for your really thoughtful,
both written and, uh, oral submission.
Um, have you any thoughts, uh, around
how the site, um, could best be set up so
as to tell the stories?
Uh, I, I think, um, as a, as a uri,
uh, is that it's recognized as a site, uh,
as an interactive site, uh,
that will tell our story
and our voices our way.
I think far too long stories like
Raco have been told from a outside point of view
or outside perspective,
or, you know, your typical historian who kind of translated
what they believe
or what they think was the interpretation of the narrative
to fit the picture
or to fit the history that, um, is ideal, uh,
for a kind of story.
And I'm, I'm thankful to people like ta de, uh, in his book
of, it's a,
it's, it's our voice.
It's our stories that are being told.
Um, and, and I think I would, I would support, um, the move
that Manawa
and wa together on how they recognize
or as a, as, uh, moving forward.
But as a descendant, I would
so love it if it could be an interactive site,
interactive site where, you know, people come
and they hear the stories from the, from Una's point of view
of what they saw, what they heard the way it is
that are being told, and that, uh,
and they're being told in our voice
Mm Uh, is descendants of those people who participated.
Mm.
So, um, thanks very much for your submission
and, um, as you said, it's a good, good, good, um,
submission that speaks for itself.
So I really appreciate your time today. And, um,
next we have Linda Campbell.
I've got, um, beside, oh,
That's fantastic. It's
called, it's, it's called
Creative Measures With Time.
Yes. Welcome.
Know my hooky, my, uh, know my Heart of my Linda Kilda.
Um, so you, you are familiar with this process.
Treat your submission as read. Thank you.
And, um, you've got up to 10 minutes today
to talk to your submission.
Well, really, um, my, um, in my submission,
it does lay out that I'm coming from the point of view of a
teacher of many years.
And, um, my real, um,
mission is to not lose the marvelous traction
that we have gained, um, in the work
that we've done in the last 10 years.
And I see it as quite fragile,
however, in kind of good form and good heart.
Um, and I just wanted to really make it clear that
what happened at OT College
did rely on chance way too much.
But the, but, um, wonderful outcomes came because right.
People were in the right place at the right time,
but there was no substantial need, uh,
or mandate for our college at OT College to,
um, do what we did.
That led to, um, the embodiment
of the New Zealand Histories curriculum.
And after a lot of chance just having two teachers
with great capacity, excellent links
and networks, the backing of the King Tonga,
two particular children, one sitting here,
and Zach Henry, who stood the whole way
and continued the whole way for the 10 years,
and others who came and went and came
and went, um, it was
by chance and then often in spite of, even in spite
of, in our own ura,
but wonderful things have come out of this.
So I, I would really want to put the question,
um, as we are linked, this all began at Raco.
It would've never happened if we hadn't gone there.
And, um, the impact of
that on the children that I was working with,
I was in careers at the time,
but with a big, long background, um,
and, um,
treaty education, I guess.
So, um, I was invited in just by chance to work
with the Year nine Academy kids who were children who
were considered that they needed
to be in their own class at the time, to have kind
of a wraparound, uh, system of learning.
And I went, went in for two hours a week for two terms,
and worked with these kids on our Wars story.
And it was amazing. They,
they could even take a whole hour lecture, lecture.
They got engaged mathematically.
They got engaged with story writing.
They Parker and Maori children together, we went back to,
to, um, Orko Orko several times.
And so this is my important point following up your last
speaker, is that it is really important
to me that raco is funded somehow.
I believe the Ministry of Education has had funds available
for, um, realizing the real stories from real
people in real places.
And I'm very excited that 90% plus aero reports,
90% plus of school teachers are fully engaged
and loving this curriculum.
That that's incredible.
Even if it is taking their time, they're enjoying the time
and it's in its early days.
So, um, I just wanna encourage, um, as much as I can,
the continuation of something in its
new fledgling form.
Fundamentally it is the people of Orco
UA of who have led the way
for this possibility.
So those stories, I, I feel that we are obliged
as a nation to bring those stories
forward and give them life.
Yeah. Hold
On.
Um, okay. We've got time.
Do you, Aaliyah, would you like to add to,
uh, Linda's submission?
Um, I can add to Linda
or my mother's submission, um, submission,
Sorry. But,
Uh, I just wanted to also, I know I took a lot
of time in my past, um, my, in my corridor,
but I also am open
to any apartheid from the select committee at this
time. It's his mom.
Wonderful. Okay.
Any questions from the committee for mother or daughter?
Not really a, uh, Adrian, not really a question,
but, um, want to enter into the discussion
because, um, uh, our role with this bill is to,
um, examine it
and send it back to the house, uh,
for further consideration.
Um, I'm trying to think how to incorporate, I personally,
I support what you are saying, um,
but the scope of the bill probably doesn't allow us, uh,
to actually, um, incorporate that.
I'm trying to think of a way that, um, you could achieve
what you want to achieve
and it saying that you've achieved so much already, um,
changing the law
and the New Zealand curriculum is a pretty big, um, thing
to be, uh, you know, to have done.
So I'm not gonna doubt your abilities to, uh, actually,
um, go back one step further.
'cause I think, I think that's what you
are telling this committee.
Um, but I think we could probably note it in the,
in the report Yeah.
To the house. Um, I,
I think there are probably other avenues
that you could think about using, I just can't think of what
if they all are right now.
But just wanted to really comment on that and,
and me to, um, you know, the ongoing, um,
work to make, um, you know, our, our country
a more understanding about its past and it,
and in doing so, its future.
So Kia
Kda Adrian, I think, you know, one aspect
that Mum perhaps didn't draw upon was, you know,
when she was talking about resourcing, a key part
of our petition was the resourcing of this education.
And I think Raco as a sacred place in many ways.
Um, it is a resource, it is a place in which
this education, these discussions can take place.
I'm not sure in which capacity this bill, um, can
provide, uh, I guess
or some, you know, Pia, I, I suppose to mana
or support to, um,
encourage it to be a place where this education takes place.
Um, but I know that Maia Muhi has a lot of dreams
and aspirations around how Rako can be a place of,
of peace, of reconciliation, of, um,
of connection for all.
And I think often the onus is put on mana to fund
and make these very important events, um,
and educational for happen.
Um, but I, I don't know if there's any capacity in which,
um, I, the Parliament, parliament could support
re resourcing of man to do that if there's, if
that is the wish of Na Kawa going forward.
But I think I just wanted to, to, uh, reemphasize, I guess
that was what, what we were kind of trying to say.
And it's linked in that regard. And,
And I would also like to say, um, to
Add to that, that when
The bill was read out,
this bill was read out in Parliament, it was joyous
to hear the cross support Mm-Hmm.
And that was the same with Mahara.
So that's a whole decade
where we have the capacity for this support.
So I guess we are, we are submitting that, um,
as much support
and backing from I think the Ministry of Education, um,
as has been shown in the past, is what we are seeking.
So it does not fall back to,
um, Toru. Yeah. Yeah.
Bye. Okay, Kilda, thank you very much.
Um, Linda and Leah for your submission
and, uh, for all the mahi that you do at a local level.
And, um, we will, uh, uh,
say thank you very much today
for appearing before the committee.
Okay. Now we have Nika. No.
Um, so Nika has canceled and is still on here.
Yeah. Responded.
Okay. So we may be nearing the end of
the public submissions.
Um, so if that's the case,
me, um, members of the public online,
we will be finishing the online session
and going to consider their submissions in private.
Uh, so we'll be moving from a public link to a private link.
Uh, thanks for tuning in. Okay.